---
layout: post
title: "Learning to Code: Fear"
categories:
  - learning to code
  - ruby
  - rails
  - life
---

Learning should be fun, not scary. But sometimes people are afraid to
learn. I see this a lot when I'm teaching people how to do things on
computers. They are paralyzed with fear, as if the next menu choice
will destroy the computer. I never understood this. I'm an
experimenter by nature, so if I can't do something, I play around
until I figure out how.

Then I noticed how my own fears were impeding my learning. This was an
important discovery. I began to face my fears and watched them whither
away one by one. I'm not done yet, but since I started this process,
learning to code has been a lot of fun.

## Fear of Reading the Source

I started messing around with Ruby years ago (before Rails, actually),
but I've only made serious progress in the past year. When I first
started I treated the libraries I was using as black boxes, a good
practice when everything is working. But when something wasn't working
as expected and documentation was sparse, I was lost because I was
afraid to look at the library's source. Sure you can just google your
error message and hope for the best, but even if you find an answer,
you're just cutting and pasting a solution that you don't
understand. These days the source for most of the libraries I use is
readily accessible on [GitHub](http://www.github.com), so solving your
problem is that much easier. And of course reading source code is a
great way to learn about your development stack as well as coding in
general. I'm not great at reading code, but, as I tell my daughter,
you only improve through practice.

## Fear of the Unknown

I've understood how to use Ruby's <code>each</code> iterator for a
long time, and I'd even occasionally reach for <code>map</code>, but I
found <code>inject</code> scary, so I avoided it. What was I afraid
of? I intuitively grasped <code>each</code>, but <code>inject</code>
wasn't so obvious to me, so I avoided it. It was almost like I was
afraid that I wouldn't be able to grasp it. But a few minutes playing
with it in IRB, and this fear was allayed. There *are* concepts that
are more difficult to grasp. I'm still working on fully understanding
lambda's and procs, for example, but now I see this as an exciting
challenge, not a reason to run in the other direction. And every time
I face down one of these fears, I gain confidence as a developer.

## Fear of Looking Stupid

It's been months since my last post on this blog. This isn't because I
didn't have any ideas. I've been eager to start writing about what I'm
learning about Ruby, Rails and programming in general, but I have been
afraid to write about it out of fear of appearing
stupid. [MM](http://120babies.ca) hates that word and admonishes my
daughter and I whenever we use it. She's right to do so--it's a
demeaning word. So why apply a demeaning word to myself, if only
indirectly? I'm not a Ruby expert, but their are plenty of blogs
written by great Ruby programmers. Writing about my own journey of
learning will help me form my own ideas and solidify my grasp of what
I'm learning. There's a reason why you write papers in University. And
I'm confident that others can learn from my epiphanies and struggles.

## Facing my Fears

So I have recognized my fears--what next? Over the last year or so,
I've learned to see when I'm under the sway of one of these
fears. It's surprisingly hard to see what you're feeling when you're
feeling it. When I catch myself wrapped up in fear, I argue with the
fear. I'm a good arguer, but it takes a while to apply this skill to
own thoughts. The thing is, most of these fears don't stand up much
scrutiny. Indeed, most of them seem silly once you've identified them.

To that end, I'm treating these types of fears as a bucket list. I've
started to choose projects that scare me, which turns out to be a
great learning strategy. What's more, in facing my fears, I've
frequently found that I'm better at programming than I thought.



